PDF- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-9Rl7dM5XtUpREm2kr6TJGAdU2IBb4VG/view?usp=drive_link
Word- https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UUqrJVKRmsC8YDJHzrBr1nxL2YpZg-fL/edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=114804870749534414165&rtpof=true&sd=true
HEALTHAI: INTELLIGENT HEALTHCARE ASSISTANT

PROJECT TEAM
Team ID: NM2025TMID03856
Team Size: 4
Team Leader: SAKTHIMURUGAN S
Team Members: RAGUL R, RAJESH S, RAJKUMAR I

1. PROJECT OVERVIEW
HealthAI is an innovative AI-powered web application designed to serve as a
personal healthcare companion. Developed using Python and leveraging the
robust capabilities of the IBM Granite-3.2-2B-Instruct Large Language Model (LLM),
the project utilizes Gradio for its user-friendly web interface. HealthAI aims to
provide users with accessible healthcare information, assist in understanding
potential health conditions, and offer insights into health data analysis.

2. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
At its core, HealthAI harnesses the power of IBM's Granite LLM to offer a
conversational AI experience for healthcare-related queries. Users can interact with
the assistant to ask questions, explore symptoms to identify possible conditions,
generate informational treatment plans, and analyze synthetic health data. The
application is built with a strong emphasis on responsible AI principles, ensuring
user safety and data privacy.
Disclaimer: This application is a prototype and is not a substitute for
professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always seek the advice of
your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have
regarding a medical condition.


3. USER INTERFACE (UI) AND WORKFLOW
The HealthAI application features an intuitive interface designed for ease of use:
Patient Profile: Users can input and manage their personal health
information, including Name, Age, Gender, Medical History, Current
Medications, and Allergies. This information aids in personalizing the AI's
responses.
Core Modules: The application is organized into distinct modules accessible
via tabs:
Patient Chat: A conversational interface for users to interact with the
AI, ask health-related questions, and receive responses.
Disease Prediction: Allows users to input symptoms and receive an
AI-generated analysis of potential conditions.
Treatment Plans: Enables the generation of personalized,
informational treatment plans based on diagnosed conditions.
Health Analytics: Provides a dashboard to visualize and analyze key
health metrics over time, offering AI-driven insights.
Health Metrics Dashboard: Displays synthetic data for Heart Rate, Blood
Pressure, and Blood Glucose, presented with trend analysis and AI-generated
insights into the user's health status.

4. TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE
The technical foundation of HealthAI is built upon a modern stack:
Frontend: Developed using Gradio Blocks API, with custom CSS for styling,
ensuring a responsive and visually appealing user experience.

Backend: Powered by Hugging Face Transformers, integrating the `ibm-
granite/granite-3.2-2b-instruct` model for natural language processing and

response generation.
Data Processing & Visualization: Libraries such as `pandas` and `numpy` are
used for data manipulation, while `plotly.express` facilitates the creation of
insightful visualizations.
State Management & Caching: Gradio's state management is employed for
maintaining user session data, and in-memory hash caching is utilized for
performance optimization.


5. SAFETY & COMPLIANCE MEASURES
Safety and responsible AI practices are paramount in HealthAI:
Emergency Keyword Detection: The system is designed to identify and flag
critical health terms (e.g., 'chest pain', 'suicide') to prompt users to seek
professional medical help immediately.
PII Filtering: Robust mechanisms are in place to detect and filter Personally
Identifiable Information (PII) such as phone numbers, emails, and
identification numbers from user inputs.
Clear Disclaimers: All AI-generated outputs are accompanied by clear
disclaimers emphasizing that the information is for educational purposes only
and not a substitute for professional medical advice.
Structured JSON Outputs: Responses are formatted in JSON to ensure
consistency and safe, predictable handling of information.

6. HOW TO RUN THE APPLICATION
Prerequisites
Python version 3.9 or higher
pip package installer
Installation Steps
Clone the repository: git clone https://github.com/yourusername/
healthai.git
Navigate to the project directory: cd healthai
Install the required dependencies: pip install -r requirements.txt
Running the Application
Execute the main script: python healthai_app.py
Access the application via your web browser at: http://127.0.0.1:7860/


7. PLATFORM AVAILABILITY
HealthAI is designed for flexibility and scalability:
Local Deployment: Easily run on personal computers and laptops.
Web Hosting: Deployable on cloud platforms like Hugging Face Spaces, AWS,
and Azure for broader accessibility.
Docker Containerization: Supports containerization for streamlined
deployment and scaling.
API Integration: The application can be integrated with other systems via
REST endpoints.

8. POTENTIAL USE CASES
The HealthAI application has a wide range of potential applications:
Patient and Family Health Companion: Empowering individuals to manage
their health proactively.
Hospital Prototype: Serving as a secure and informative AI assistant for
healthcare providers.
Research Tool: A valuable resource for developers and researchers exploring
LLM applications in healthcare.
Educational Aid: A supplementary learning tool for students and medical
professionals.

9. LIMITATIONS
While HealthAI offers significant capabilities, it's important to note its current
limitations:
Synthetic Data Only: The application currently processes only synthetic
health data, not real patient information.
Informational Purpose: All outputs are strictly for informational and
educational purposes and do not constitute medical diagnosis.
No Clinical Certification: The prototype is not certified for clinical
deployment and should not be used in direct patient care settings without
further validation and regulatory approval.


10. CONCLUSION
HealthAI represents a responsible and forward-thinking approach to integrating
LLMs into the healthcare domain. By prioritizing usability, safety, and accessibility,
this prototype lays a solid foundation for future advancements in AI-driven
healthcare solutions. It demonstrates the potential of LLMs to empower users with

health knowledge and contribute to a more informed approach to personal well-
being.

HEALTHAI APPLICATION INTERFACE SHOWCASE

PATIENT CHAT INTERFACE

DISEASE PREDICTION INTERFACE

HEALTH ANALYTICS INTERFACE
